Roadmap content (#9241)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/roadmap/account-abstraction/index.md

</ExpandableCard>

<ExpandableCard title="EIP-2938: changing the Ethereum protocol to support account abstraction" eventCategory="/roadmap/account-abstract" eventName="clicked EIP-2938: changing the Ethereum protocol to support account abstraction">

EIP-2938 aims to update the Ethereum protocol by introducing a new transaction type, `AA_TX_TYPE` that includes three fields: `nonce`, `target` and `data`, where `nonce` is a transaction counter, `target` is the entry point contract address and `data` is EVM bytecode. To execute these transactions, two new instructions (known as opcodes) have to be added to the EVM: `NONCE` and `PAYGAS`. The `NONCE` opcode tracks the transaction sequence and `PAYGAS` calculates and withdraws the gas required to execute the transaction from the contract's balance. These new features allow Ethereum to support smart contract wallets natively as the necessary infrastructure is built in to Ethereum's protocol.

Note that EIP-2938 is currently not active. The community is currently favoring EIP-4337 because it does not require changes to the protocol.

</ExpandableCard>

## Current progress {#current-progress}

> Smart contract wallets are already available, but more upgrades are required to make them as decentralized and permissionless as possible. EIP-4337 is a mature proposal that does not require any changes to Ethereum's protocol, so it is possible that this could be implemented quickly. However, upgrades that alter Ethereum's protocol are currently not in active development, so those changes may take much longer to ship. It is also possible that account abstraction is achieved well enough by EIP-4337 that no protocol changes are ever required.

Reviewer: @jmcook1186 "current progress" information is critical information and should be also presented on the main subpages. I would suggest moving this out of the dev docs there on all pages or including in on both.

Author: ok i added current progress summaries to the main subpages - lmk what you think

  - Understand why account abstraction will make Ethereum easier to use
---

Account abstraction allows users to add new logic to their accounts. Today, users interact with Ethereum using "Externally Owned Accounts" (EOAs). These are the only entities that can initiate a transaction or execute functions in smart contracts, and they pay gas fees in ETH whenever those transactions change Ethereum's state. Account abstraction aims to expand the types of entity that can initiate transactions to include smart contracts. This allows users to flexibly program more security and and better user experiences into their accounts.

Account abstraction unlocks many benefits for the user, including:

- no more seed phrases
- define your own flexible security rules
- recover your account if you lose the keys
- share your account security across trusted devices or individuals
- pay someone else's gas, or have someone else pay yours
- easily batch transactions together (e.g. approve and execute a swap in one go)
- more opportunities for dapps and wallet developers to innovate on user experiences
- upgrade the cryptography securing an account when quantum computers arrive

> These benefits are not available to today's Ethereum users because accounts are simple public-private key pairs. The security model is simple: if you have the private key you can do _anything_ within the rules of the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM); if you do not have the private key you can do _nothing_. This means lost keys are completely unrecoverable and stolen keys give thieves instant access to all the funds in an account. The logic that can be embedded in these accounts is only the validation that is native to the EVM and cannot be customized. Account abstraction is the solution to these problems. Ultimately it means a user can enjoy all the benefits of Ethereum without having to know, or care, about the underlying technology.

Author: yea... ok i updated this paragraph, hopefully it is clear.

## Beyond seed phrases {#beyond-seed-phrases}

Today's accounts are secured using private keys that are calculated from seed phrases. Any person who has access to a seed phrase can easily discover the private key protecting an account and gain access to all the assets it protects. If a private key and seed phrase are lost. they can never be recovered and the assets they control are frozen forever. Securing these seed phrases is awkward, even for expert users and seed phrase phishing is one of the most common ways users get scammed.

> Account abstraction will solve this problem by using a smart contract to hold assets and authorize transactions. These smart contracts can then be decorated with custom logic to make them as secure and tailored to the user as possible. Accessing the smart contract does not require a seed phrase or access to a private key. Instead, you can access the account using, for example, a username, password and autheticator app. Then, custom security logic can be built into the wallet itself. A wallet can be instructed to block every transaction unless it is to a trusted address or verified using 2-factor authentication. Alternatively, you might want to separate out types of transactions with different rules, for example low value transactions can be verified on a mobile phone, whereas higher value transactions require verification from multiple authenticated devices.

Author: fair point - removed this example.

It is also interesting to consider how purchases could change with account abstraction. Today, each transaction has to be approved and executed from a wallet prefunded with a sufficient amount of the correct token. With account absraction the experience could be more like familiar online shopping where a user could fill a "basket" with items and click once to purchase all at once, with all the logic required handled by the contract, not the user.

These are just a few examples of how user experiences could be levelled up by account abstraction, but there will be many more that we haven't imagined yet. Account abstraction frees developers from the constraints of present-day EOAs, allows them to bring the good aspects of web2 into web3 without sacrificing self-custody and to hack creatively on inventive new user experiences.

## How will account abstraction be implemented? {#how-will-aa-be-implemented}

> Smart contract wallets are already implemented today, but they are difficult to implement because they are not supported at the protocol level and ionstead rely on wrapping relatively complex code around normal Ethereum transactions. They are also too centralized, relying upon a central "relayer" run by the wallet developers to translate messages signed by the user to normal Ethereum transactions. There are two possible paths to solving these problems: 1. creating a generalized network of relayers that can translate between smart contract messages and transactions; and 2: modifying the Ethereum protocol to allow contracts to initiate transactions.

Author: ok, softening the wording here.

---
title: Account abstraction
description: An overview of Ethereum's plans to make user accounts simpler and safer
lang: en

> template: staking

Reviewer 2: Will all pages use the staking template? 

I'm not 100% sure (build isn't working properly), but doesn't the template itself dictate what is contained in the navigation? If so, we'll need to account for this.

![Screenshot 2023-02-24 at 09 56 33](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/62268199/221149140-302d35f8-89d0-45f3-938d-1d411ed5b37a.png)

emoji: ":money_with_wings:"
image: ../../../assets/staking/leslie-pool.png
alt: Leslie the rhino swimming in the pool.
sidebarDepth: 2
summaryPoints:
  - Understand why account abstraction will make Ethereum easier to use
  - Learn about upcoming changes to how users will interact with Ethereum

>   - Read why account abstraction will help users to secure their assets

Reviewer 2: Summary points, when used elsewhere on the site, give the high-level summary of the  contents of the page. This is being used to tell users what they will learn (if they read the entire page), without actually giving them any of the information. 

Was this a conscious choice? If so, would be curious to hear the rational here.

cc: @konopkja

Reviewer 2: To be more specific, I'd expect this to say something like:

  - Account abstraction will make Ethereum easier to use
  - etc
  - etc

---

Today, users interact with Ethereum using "Externally Owned Accounts" (EOAs). These are the only entities that can initiate a transaction or execute functions in smart contracts, and they pay gas fees in ETH whenever those transactions change Ethereum's state. Account abstraction aims to relax this constraint to allow smart contract wallets to initiate transactions too. This allows users to flexibly program more security and better user experiences into their accounts.

Account abstraction is an upgrade that makes smart contract wallets first-class citizens, natively supported on Ethereum. Those smart contract wallets unlock many benefits for the user, including:

- no more seed phrases
- define your own flexible security rules

> - recover your account if you lose the keys

Author: oh, good point - that was a clumsy bullet point. removed.

- share your account security across trusted devices or individuals
- pay someone else's gas, or have someone else pay yours
- easily batch transactions together (e.g. approve and execute a swap in one go)
- more opportunities for dapps and wallet developers to innovate on user experiences
- upgrade the cryptography securing an account when quantum computers arrive

> These benefits are not natively supported today because Ethereum accounts are simple public-private key pairs. The security model is simple: if you have the private key you can do _anything_ within the rules of the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM); if you do not have the private key you can do _nothing_. This means lost keys are completely unrecoverable and stolen keys give thieves instant access to all the funds in an account. The logic that can be embedded in these accounts is only the validation that is native to the EVM and cannot be customized. Smart contract wallets are the solution to these problems, but today they are difficult to program because in the end any logic they implement has to resolve to a sequence of EOA transactions before they can be processed by Ethereum. Account abstraction enables smart contracts to initiate transactions themselves, so that any logic that the user wishes to implement can be coded into the smart contract wallet itself and executed on Ethereum.

Author: ```suggestion
These benefits are not natively supported today because Ethereum accounts (EOA's) are simply public-private key pairs. They work like this: 

- if you have the private key you can do _anything_ within the rules of the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM)
- if you do not have the private key you can do _nothing_. 

If you lose your keys they can't be recovered, and stolen keys give thieves instant access to all the funds in an account. 

Smart contract wallets are the solution to these problems, but today they are difficult to program because in the end any logic they implement has to be translated into a set of EOA transactions before they can be processed by Ethereum. Account abstraction enables smart contracts to initiate transactions themselves, so that any logic that the user wishes to implement can be coded into the smart contract wallet itself and executed on Ethereum.
```

Ultimately, account abstraction is about improving support for smart contract wallets, making them easier to build and safer to use. In the end, with account abstraction users can enjoy all the benefits of Ethereum without having to know, or care, about the underlying technology.

> ## Beyond seed phrases {#beyond-seed-phrases}

Author: ok had a go at rewording this for clarity

- **Multisig authorization**: You can share authorization credentials across multiple trusted people or devices. Then the contract can be configured so that transactions of more than some preset value require authorization from a certain proportion (e.g. 3/5) of the trusted parties. For example, high value transactions might require approval from both a mobile device and a hardware wallet, or signatures from accounts distributed to trusted family members.
- **Account freezing**: If a device is lost or compromised the account can be locked from another authorized device, protecting the user's assets.
- **Account recovery**: Lost a device or forgotten a password? In the current paradigm this means your assets could be frozen forever. With a smart contract wallet, you can set some pre-approved accounts that can authorize new devices and reset access.
- **Set transaction limits**: specify daily thresholds for how much value can be transferred from the accoutn in a day/week/month. This means if an attacker does gain access to your account they can't drain everything at once and you have opportunities to freeze and reset access.

> - **Create whitelists**: only allow transactions to certain addresses that you know to be safe. This means that _even if_ your private key was stolen, the attacker could not send funds to non-whitelisted destination accounts.

Author: cool, done.

It is also interesting to consider how purchases could change with account abstraction. Today, each transaction has to be approved and executed from a wallet pre-funded with a sufficient amount of the correct token. With account abstraction the experience could be more like familiar online shopping where a user could fill a "basket" with items and click once to purchase all at once, with all the logic required handled by the contract, not the user.

These are just a few examples of how user experiences could be levelled up by account abstraction, but there will be many more that we haven't imagined yet. Account abstraction frees developers from the constraints of present-day EOAs, allows them to bring the good aspects of web2 into web3 without sacrificing self-custody and to hack creatively on inventive new user experiences.

## How will account abstraction be implemented? {#how-will-aa-be-implemented}

> Smart contract wallets are already implemented today, but they are difficult to implement because they are not supported at the protocol level and instead rely on wrapping relatively complex code around normal Ethereum transactions. This problem can be solved by allowing smart contracts to initiate transactions, since then the logic implemented by the wallet can be handled in Ethereum smart contracts rather than happening off-chain and being translated into Ethereum transactions. This has the added benefit of increasing decentralization since it removes the need for "relayers" run by wallet developers to translate messages signed by the user to normal Ethereum transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Smart contract wallets exist today but are challenging to implement because the EVM does not support them. Instead, they rely on wrapping relatively complex code around standard Ethereum transactions. Ethereum can change this by allowing smart contracts to initiate transactions, handling the necessary logic in Ethereum smart contracts instead of off-chain. Putting logic into smart contracts also increases Ethereum's decentralization since it removes the need for "relayers" run by wallet developers to translate messages signed by the user to regular Ethereum transactions.
```

</ExpandableCard>

<ExpandableCard title="EIP-2938: changing the Ethereum protocol to support account abstraction">

EIP-2938 aims to update the Ethereum protocol by introducing a new transaction type, `AA_TX_TYPE` that includes three fields: `nonce`, `target` and `data`, where `nonce` is a transaction counter, `target` is the entry point contract address and `data` is EVM bytecode. To execute these transactions, two new instructions (known as opcodes) have to be added to the EVM: `NONCE` and `PAYGAS`. The `NONCE` opcode tracks the transaction sequence and `PAYGAS` calculates and withdraws the gas required to execute the transaction from the contract's balance. These new features allow Ethereum to support smart contract wallets natively as the necessary infrastructure is built in to Ethereum's protocol.

Note that EIP-2938 is currently not active. The community is currently favoring EIP-4337 because it does not require changes to the protocol.

[Read more about EIP2938](https://hackmd.io/@SamWilsn/ryhxoGp4D#What-is-EIP-2938)
[Read the EIP-2938 documentation](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2938)

</ExpandableCard>

## When will account abstraction ship? {when-will-aa-ship}

> Smart contract wallets are already available, but more upgrades are required to make them as decentralized and permissionless as possible. EIP-4337 is a mature proposal that does not require any changes to Ethereum's protocol, so it is possible that this could be implemented quickly. Upgrades that alter Ethereum's protocol are currently not in active development, so may take much longer to ship. It is also very possible that account abstraction is achieved well enough by EIP-4337 that no protocol changes are ever required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Smart contract wallets are already available, but more upgrades are required to make them as decentralized and permissionless as possible. EIP-4337 is a mature proposal that does not require any changes to Ethereum's protocol, so it is possible that this could be implemented quickly. However, upgrades that alter Ethereum's protocol are currently not in active development, so those changes may take much longer to ship. It is also possible that account abstraction is achieved well enough by EIP-4337 that no protocol changes are ever required.
```

Reviewer 2: This skirts the question of the heading. 

Should we give a clear answer on timeline (i.e. not actively being worked on by client devs, expected 2024 at the earliest?)

> ## Further Reading {#further-reading}

Reviewer 2: Headings should use sentence case 

```suggestion
## Further reading {#further-reading}
```

- [Watch the account abstraction panel discussion from Devcon Bogota](https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=WsZBymiyT-8)
- [Watch "Why account abstraction is a game changer for dapps" from Devcon Bogota](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OwppworJGzs)
- [Watch "Account abstraction ELI5" from Devcon Bogota](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QuYZWJj65AY)
- [Read Vitalik's "Road to Account Abstraction" notes](https://notes.ethereum.org/@vbuterin/account_abstraction_roadmap#Transaction-inclusion-lists)

> - [Read Vitalik's blog post on social recovery wallets](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/01/11/recovery.html)

Reviewer 2: This is introducing a new convention for how we list further reading items by using action verbs here. Was this a conscious choice? 

Not opposed to this approach, but we've agreed that we'd like consistency across pages, so it feels like we should have a broader discussion about this, given there are site wide implications. 

cc: @konopkja

Author: updated to remove action verbs
